.TH FORGEISO 1 "2025" "ForgeISO" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
forgeiso \- Linux ISO builder and autoinstall injection tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B forgeiso
.I COMMAND
[\fIOPTIONS\fP]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B forgeiso
builds custom Linux ISOs locally on bare metal with no cloud agents or endpoints.
It supports autoinstall injection with cloud-init configuration, SHA-256 verification,
ISO filesystem diffing, SBOM scanning, and QEMU-based smoke testing.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B doctor
Report tooling availability and host prerequisites.
.TP
.B inspect \fI\-\-source\fP \fISOURCE\fP
Inspect an ISO file or URL and display metadata (distro, release, architecture, SHA-256).
.TP
.B verify \fI\-\-source\fP \fISOURCE\fP [\fI\-\-sums-url\fP \fIURL\fP]
Verify the SHA-256 checksum of an ISO against official checksums.
Auto-detects the Ubuntu SHA256SUMS URL from ISO metadata.
.TP
.B build \fI\-\-source\fP \fISOURCE\fP \fI\-\-out\fP \fIDIR\fP [\fIOPTIONS\fP]
Build a customised ISO from a base source ISO and optional overlay directory.
.TP
.B inject \fI\-\-source\fP \fISOURCE\fP \fI\-\-out\fP \fIDIR\fP [\fIOPTIONS\fP]
Embed a cloud-init autoinstall configuration into an Ubuntu ISO for fully
unattended installation. Supports 60+ configuration flags covering identity,
SSH, networking, firewall, storage, encryption, services, containers, and more.
.TP
.B diff \fI\-\-base\fP \fIISO\fP \fI\-\-target\fP \fIISO\fP
Compare two ISOs and list added, removed, modified, and unchanged files.
.TP
.B scan \fI\-\-source\fP \fIISO\fP [\fIOPTIONS\fP]
Run security scans (SBOM generation, vulnerability scanning, secrets detection)
against a built ISO artifact.
.TP
.B test \fI\-\-source\fP \fIISO\fP [\fIOPTIONS\fP]
Run BIOS and UEFI boot smoke tests against an ISO using QEMU.
.TP
.B report \fI\-\-build\fP \fIDIR\fP [\fI\-\-format\fP html|json]
Render a build report in HTML or JSON format.
.SH INJECT OPTIONS (selected)
.TP
\fB\-\-hostname\fP \fINAME\fP
Set the installed system hostname.
.TP
\fB\-\-username\fP \fINAME\fP, \fB\-\-password\fP \fIPASS\fP
Set the primary user credentials (password auto-hashed to SHA-512-crypt).
.TP
\fB\-\-ssh\-key\fP \fIKEY\fP
Add an SSH authorized key (repeatable).
.TP
\fB\-\-static\-ip\fP \fICIDR\fP, \fB\-\-gateway\fP \fIGW\fP
Configure static networking via netplan.
.TP
\fB\-\-firewall\fP, \fB\-\-allow\-port\fP \fIPORT\fP, \fB\-\-deny\-port\fP \fIPORT\fP
Enable UFW firewall with port rules.
.TP
\fB\-\-docker\fP, \fB\-\-podman\fP
Install Docker CE or Podman container runtimes.
.TP
\fB\-\-encrypt\fP, \fB\-\-encrypt\-passphrase\fP \fIPASS\fP
Enable LUKS full-disk encryption.
.TP
\fB\-\-swap\-size\fP \fIMB\fP
Create a swap file of the specified size.
.TP
\fB\-\-grub\-timeout\fP \fISEC\fP, \fB\-\-grub\-cmdline\fP \fIPARAM\fP
Configure GRUB boot parameters.
.TP
\fB\-\-no\-user\-interaction\fP
Enable fully automated (unattended) installation.
.PP
Run
.B forgeiso inject \-\-help
for the full list of 60+ inject flags.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B "forgeiso doctor"
Check host prerequisites.
.TP
.B "forgeiso verify \-\-source ubuntu\-24.04\-server\-amd64.iso"
Verify ISO checksum against Ubuntu's official SHA256SUMS file.
.TP
.B "forgeiso inject \-\-source ubuntu\-24.04\-server\-amd64.iso \-\-out /tmp/out \e"
.B "  \-\-hostname bastion \-\-username admin \-\-password secret \e"
.B "  \-\-group sudo \-\-firewall \-\-allow\-port 22 \-\-docker \-\-no\-user\-interaction"
Build a server ISO with user, firewall, and Docker configured.
.TP
.B "forgeiso diff \-\-base ubuntu.iso \-\-target custom.iso"
List files changed between two ISOs.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.cache/forgeiso/
Engine workspace and ISO cache directory.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Set log verbosity (e.g. \fBRUST_LOG=debug forgeiso doctor\fP).
.SH NOTES
Builds require a Linux host with
.B xorriso\fP,
.B squashfs\-tools\fP,
and
.B mtools\fP
installed. UEFI boot testing additionally requires
.B qemu\-system\-x86_64\fP
and
.BR ovmf .
.SH AUTHOR
Jamal Al-Sarraf <https://github.com/jalsarraf0>
.SH REPORTING BUGS
https://github.com/jalsarraf0/ForgeISO/issues
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 2024\-2025 Jamal Al-Sarraf.
License: Apache-2.0 <https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xorriso (1),
.BR qemu\-system\-x86_64 (1),
.BR cloud\-init (1)
